For more information on Nancy Carrasco, please visit the Pew Scholars in the Biomedical Sciences.
For more information on this oral history, please contact the Director of the Center for Oral History. 
INTERVIEWEE: 	Nancy Carrasco
DATE: 	7 March 1990
INTERVIEWERS: 	Arnold Thackray
 	Richard Sawyer
LOCATION: 	Coral Gables, Florida
THACKRAY: Nancy, can you start by telling us a little about your parents, their occupations, their education, where they lived, the world that you were born into.
CARRASCO: I was born in Mexico City [Mexico], and my father is a chemical engineer. My mother is a psychologist, and so the environment at home was clearly guided towards academics.
THACKRAY: Do you have brothers and sisters?
CARRASCO: Yes, we are four. I am the oldest. The second child, my sister Marisa, obtained her Ph.D. in experimental psychology at Princeton University, and now she is a faculty member at Wesleyan University. The third child, my sister Rossana, is a filmmaker in Mexico, and the youngest, my brother Salvador, is a filmmaking student at NYU [New York University].
THACKRAY: You grew up in Mexico City, is that right?
CARRASCO: That’s right.
THACKRAY: And the high school that you went to there, how big was the graduating class in that high school?
CARRASCO: It was about sixty people. It was a private school. Unfortunately, the quality of public schools in Mexico varies widely and is often not as good as would be desired, so many middle-class families try to send their kids to private schools.
THACKRAY: What is your family religion, the religious affiliation of it? Did your parents have one or not?
CARRASCO: My parents are Catholic.THACKRAY: Are you yourself a Catholic or what?
CARRASCO: No.
THACKRAY: How would you describe yourself, religiously?
CARRASCO: As a freethinker, I suppose.
THACKRAY: Go back into the high school, was the curriculum specialized or general?
CARRASCO: I don’t know how familiar you are with the system in Mexico, but high school is very different from here. You study about fifteen subjects, and you study many of the things that kids study in college here. The curriculum covers everything from philosophy, ethics, logic, what we call the universal literature, and history, geography, all the way to biology and chemistry and mathematics. It’s three years, and by the third year you have to choose the direction that you are going to. Since I wanted to go to medical school, I was concentrated in biology and chemistry.
THACKRAY: Was it medical school rather than an interest in science itself that made you focus that way?
CARRASCO: At that point I was very interested in human biology, and medical school was really the only place where you get to study that as such. I considered going to biology or chemistry, but then in biology you study a lot of taxonomy of plants and animals and other things, so I ended up choosing medical school.
THACKRAY: Your undergraduate education was where, in Mexico City?
CARRASCO: In Mexico you go to a medical school after high school.
THACKRAY: So you went directly to medical school.
CARRASCO: Right, to the National University [Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México].
THACKRAY: What year was that?
CARRASCO: That was 1975.
THACKRAY: And how long is the course, the medical course?
CARRASCO: Six years.
THACKRAY: But you also, it says here that you got a master’s degree in chemistry. Is that right?
CARRASCO: More precisely, in biochemistry.
THACKRAY: This was while you were in medical school or what?
CARRASCO: What happened was that in medical school you first study the basic sciences as everywhere else. Then you go to the hospitals. I had enjoyed basic sciences a lot, but when you get to the hospitals you realize that medicine is not as scientific as you would like it to be. There’s a lot of empiricism to it. That was quite a disappointment. At that point, I had liked biochemistry as a subject, so I decided to investigate if I really liked doing biochemistry, and I decided to start attending a research laboratory in the evenings, nights. At the time that I was a medical student I started doing research. By the time that I finished medical school, I had no doubt that I wanted to concentrate on research. I managed to do my internship in research, and during that time I started my master’s.
THACKRAY: And that was in biochemistry.
CARRASCO: In biochemistry, yes.
THACKRAY: How was medical school being paid for, and doing this master’s degree?
CARRASCO: The National University is virtually free. It has a symbolic fee that is truly symbolic. I didn’t have to worry about tuition or anything like that, and once you’re enrolled in a master’s program you receive a stipend.
THACKRAY: Did you have a master’s thesis? What was that about?
CARRASCO: It was about potassium transport in yeast.
THACKRAY: And you decided you liked doing research. What happened then?
CARRASCO: After finishing my master’s, I wanted to go abroad, and I was interested in pursuing research on the transport field. So I joined Dr. [H. Ronald] Kaback‘s lab at the Roche Institute of Molecular Biology.
THACKRAY: Where is that?
CARRASCO: In Nutley, New Jersey.
THACKRAY: That was to take a regular position there, a job?
CARRASCO: A position as a postdoctoral fellow. I obtained a fellowship from NIH [National Institutes of Health]. It’s called Fogarty International Fellowship.
THACKRAY: And this was explicitly for non-U.S. citizens?
CARRASCO: Right.
THACKRAY: How did you choose that particular lab? Had you got some choice as to where you could go with it?
CARRASCO: Once it was decided that the area was going to be New York, because I combined this with my husband’s [Samuel Zyman] interests, Kaback‘s lab was my first choice. I wrote to him, and he said that he had space but he didn’t have a position, so if I could get a fellowship I would be welcome. I wrote to NIH and got this fellowship.
THACKRAY: Go sideways. You just mentioned your husband. When did you get married, and what is his background, and what does he do?
CARRASCO: I met him in medical school. He’s also a physician, but he decided to switch to music. He came to the Juilliard School to get a doctorate in composition. Now he’s on the faculty there.
THACKRAY: [laughter] That’s fairly unusual.
CARRASCO: Yes.
THACKRAY: You both came at the same time?
CARRASCO: Yes, we came together.
THACKRAY: That must have been difficult to work out. You seem to have managed it very well.
CARRASCO: In the end it worked out very well. At the beginning, I had been invited to a lab in Europe, in Switzerland, and I was excited about that possibility. But when we investigated about the music situation in Zurich [Switzerland] it was not that great. We decided that if we were leaving the country and the family and the friends, we should try to go to a place that would be really good for both of us. That is how we ended up in New York.
SAWYER: Did you already have pretty good English by that time?
CARRASCO: I was used to reading it. A lot of my textbooks were in English, because it takes a while to translate them into Spanish. If you really want to study in the latest editions, you cannot afford to wait for the translation. However, I was not used to speaking the language.
SAWYER: Was that a problem when you first came to this country?
CARRASCO: Not a problem, but it’s surprising, because you…there are so many trivial expressions that you never have read, so when you come to the lab and there is all this jargon and a number of expressions which I was not familiar with. But then you get used to them.
THACKRAY: Can you talk a little about the Roche Institute? I don’t know anything about it. How big is it? What’s...
CARRASCO: It’s actually an interesting place. It’s an institute devoted to basic research that is completely financed by Hoffmann-La Roche, the Swiss pharmaceutical company. The company in the States, this one in Nutley, New Jersey, is huge. It had, when I was there, about ten thousand employees. On one side of the area there’s the Institute, which is completely independent. It provides a very nice atmosphere in the sense that people can completely concentrate on· their research without having to worry about grants and money or teaching responsibilities or anything of that sort. On the other hand, it doesn’t have students. It operates with postdocs only.
THACKRAY: And how many people, how big is it?
CARRASCO: I’d say, around thirty-five principal investigators. There are four departments, and I was in the department of biochemistry.
THACKRAY: So how many people were in there, how many postdocs and so on?
CARRASCO: In that lab? The lab was around ten persons.
THACKRAY: Was it very different from the lab in Mexico City?
CARRASCO: Yes. The most striking difference was the speed at which things took place. Here you can pick up the phone and place an urgent order to get any compound and you can have it the next day. You don’t have to wait a long time in order to get journals. There is a lot of communication on the phone, whereas when you’re in Mexico, for the most part you learn things after reading journals. I was pretty surprised by that speed. I remember getting a telephone call a few months after I was there because someone had heard Ron Kaback talking about a result of mine. But this was in a talk, and someone told someone else, and this person decided to give me a call and ask about it. I was quite impressed. Then I realized that that’s the way, which is great.
THACKRAY: Your research in that lab had to be pretty focused, did it, or not?
CARRASCO: I was interested in transport, and that laboratory has been studying one of the most widely-studied membrane transport proteins, the lactose carrier from coli. All of my research in that laboratory was centered around that protein.
THACKRAY: Apart from the speed at which you could do things, what other differences did you see in the style of the lab?
CARRASCO: Obviously it was a richer place, being part of a company. I was not used to working with so many disposable things that are used once and thrown away. Also the academic life in the Institute was quite interesting, because a lot of scientists who go to the New York area stop at Roche, so I got to hear a number of people whom I had met only through their publications. That was interesting.
THACKRAY: What was the working life of that lab in terms of the hours in a day and the days in a week that people were working?
CARRASCO: It was a very intense lab. People by and large worked very hard, I’d say from 8:30 or 9:00 to…well, everybody had sort of a different schedule. I tend to be a late person. At least until eight or so, and most people worked on weekends as well. But many times I did experiments late into the night.
THACKRAY: A lot of the people there were making a career with the company, were they?
CARRASCO: No, no. Not at all. No, because the company has its own research facilities.
THACKRAY: Well, I say they were making a career in this Institute.
CARRASCO: Most of the people who are there are transitory, being postdocs for two or three years, and then, depending on their interests, they either try to get an academic position or a position in industry or a second postdoc.
THACKRAY: It really was effectively an academic institute?
CARRASCO: Yes, absolutely, because the company just provides the money. It doesn’t steer research in any specific direction. They have their own people doing research on topics that they’re interested in.
THACKRAY: And you were there quite a number of years, I guess.
CARRASCO: Almost five years.
THACKRAY: What made you decide to stay that long, and what made you decide to leave?
CARRASCO: When I first came to this country, I thought that I would stay for two or three years, learn as much as possible, and go back to Mexico and teach whatever I would have learned. But exactly during that time the economy in Mexico collapsed completely, and two of the areas that were mostly affected—among many others—were science and the arts. It was a combination of factors. On one hand what happened in Mexico, and then my husband was finishing his doctorate. At that time there was a rule at Roche that postdocs couldn’t stay longer than three years. However, after a year and half or so I was offered a position of research fellow—I guess that was the correct title—in order to avoid having that problem, so I could practically stay as long as I wanted. Then when it became evident that…
THACKRAY: Why did they want you to stay?
CARRASCO: Because the work was going well. Actually, in the whole Institute there were only three of these positions. Then it became evident that the best thing for us would be to stay. My husband got a faculty position at Juilliard, and I decided that, although I liked that lab very much, I wanted to start my own and looked for a faculty position in the New York area.
THACKRAY: Was that difficult to find?
CARRASCO: No, I guess I was lucky. I wrote to three or four places, and I was invited for an interview in all of them. I gave talks, and I got offers, and in the end I decided to go to [Albert] Einstein [College of Medicine].
THACKRAY: Is being an assistant professor very different from being at Roche, or not?
CARRASCO: Yes, definitely. At Roche I devoted a hundred percent of my time to the research, to doing experiments and thinking about them. I never had to worry about money. I never had to worry about attending committees or really teaching. I had a couple of summer students at Roche, but it’s different from having graduate students in your lab. Yes, it’s very different.
THACKRAY: How much teaching do you.have to do?
CARRASCO: The philosophy at Einstein is that the junior faculty members should not teach much, so that they can concentrate on starting up their labs and taking off. I only teach a few lectures in the pharmacology course to the medical students and a few lectures that I’m invited to in different courses for the grad school, but by teaching I also meant teaching people in your lab, which is very time-demanding.
THACKRAY: Did your line of research change as you left Roche and started at Einstein or not?
CARRASCO: That’s an interesting question. The answer is yes. I’m working with a completely different system now, although it’s also a transport system. From that standpoint you could say that it’s similar, but the system itself is completely different. At Roche I was working with prokaryotes. Now I’m working with eukaryotes, and I’m doing things that I had never done before.
THACKRAY: Why did you make that change?
CARRASCO: Several reasons. One of them was that, maybe because after all I’m a physician, deep inside I wanted to switch from prokaryotes to eukaryotes and work on a problem with physiological relevance, and maybe even potential medical relevance. That’s one reason. The other one is that it would have been hard to compete against my previous lab studying a system that that laboratory had been studying for the past twenty years in a very successful manner.
THACKRAY: It’s also difficult to start up a new line of work.
CARRASCO: It is, yes. It’s a big risk, and I couldn’t write a grant immediately. I had to generate preliminary data first. Einstein was very supportive. They completely understood my situation, and they said, yes, take your time generating preliminary data and then supplement your grant.
THACKRAY: Was the grant successful?
CARRASCO: Yes, fortunately.
THACKRAY: How much support do you have right now? Where do you have support from and what’s the total amount?
CARRASCO: I have an R01 NIH grant for three years, and that’s roughly a hundred thousand a year, and the Pew award.
THACKRAY: And how many people have you got working with you? What does your lab consist of?
CARRASCO: It consists of a postdoctoral fellow, Steve [Stephen] Kaminsky, who graduated from Fred [Frederic M.] Richards’ lab at Yale University; a graduate student who’s just starting…Orlie Levy’s her name…and a technician; and I have a very bright high school student also, whose name is Vihas Patel.
THACKRAY: Would you like to have a bigger lab?
CARRASCO: Yes. Yes, since we are developing…not only did I switch lines of research, but I’m studying a system that had not been studied at the molecular level before. We are setting up so many things that, yes, I would like to have more people, but especially motivated people.
SAWYER: Are there any limits on how big you want it to get?
CARRASCO: Yes. At this point I don’t think I would like to have twenty people because that would be unreasonable. I wouldn’t have the time that each person deserves. But one or two, I think, I could handle.
THACKRAY: What are you up to in your lab? What are you doing?
CARRASCO: I’m studying the iodide carrier of the thyroid gland. As I’m sure you know, iodide is concentrated in the thyroid gland. This system was identified by the physiologists over forty years ago. Surprisingly enough, nothing is known at the molecular level, so we’re trying to understand how that protein works.
[END OF AUDIO, FILE 1.1]
THACKRAY: How is it going?
CARRASCO: It’s going. It’s not moving at the speed that I would like to see, but we’ve made some progress.
THACKRAY: Have you got some publications out of it?
CARRASCO: Yes, we have a JBC [Journal of Biological Chemistry] paper showing the expression of the system in Xenopus oocytes.1
THACKRAY: How much work are you doing, in hours? Are you doing more or less than you were at Roche, or much the same?
CARRASCO: At the bench I’m doing less, because now I have to take care of all these responsibilities. Altogether, maybe more.
THACKRAY: Just staying with some of the personal things, you don’t have any children, do you?
CARRASCO: No, I don’t.
THACKRAY:  Do you hope to or plan to?
CARRASCO: Eventually.
THACKRAY: How do you think those pieces are going to fit together?
CARRASCO: I think it’s going to be complicated. On the other hand, there are examples of people who’ve done it, and I don’t see myself at age sixty regretting not having had a family.
THACKRAY: What does your husband think about it? Is he equally spending time on his work?
CARRASCO: Yes, he is extremely busy. He has a big teaching load, plus he’s composing. He has commissions and deadlines, and he’s quite busy as well. But he also wishes to have a family.
THACKRAY: To go back to your science for a moment, if you got really lucky, everything just went well and went well and kept going well, five or ten years from now what would you hope to have shown or established, do you think?
CARRASCO: I would have liked to…first of all, we’re intending to clone the gene coding for this protein. Once we have the cDNA in hand and the protein purified and reconstituted in a functional way, we want to understand how this protein utilizes the energy released by sodium, by the movement of sodium ions down their concentration gradient to catalyze the uphill movement of iodide. We would want to understand how this process is regulated by TSH [thyroid-stimulating hormone], and we are very interested in understanding what happens during some thyroid malignancies. Actually that’s the way that many times these tumors are discovered in the hospital. The patient is subjected to a thyroid gammagram, and if a region with decreased radioactive iodide accumulating ability is detected, it is considered a possible malignancy.
Another thing is that there is, to date, only one example of a eukaryotic protein of this kind (symporter) that has been cloned, namely the Na+/glucose carrier from rabbit intestine. There are other sodium-driven transporters, and so we would like to see if all these proteins share certain homology in their sodium domains. We’re also interested in other tissues that accumulate iodide, in particular the lactating mammary gland. Nothing is known about that system. As soon as we have more information about the system in the thyroid, we’re planning to study that one as well, which is very interesting. One doesn’t see any activity during pregnancy, even after delivery. When the animals—the experiments have been done in animals—start lactating, you see a tremendous accumulation of iodide in the mammary gland and in the milk. That’s actually the only source of iodine for the babies, which is very important for the production of their thyroid hormones.
If in five years we had understood how the protein works, how it is regulated, and how iodide is accumulated in other tissues, I think I would be pleased.
THACKRAY: Are you practicing medicine at all?
CARRASCO: No, not at all.
THACKRAY: Would you like to, or was that simply a step on the way?
CARRASCO: No. Once I started doing research, I realized that I liked that much better than seeing patients and being in a hospital. As I had said before, I actually managed to do my internship doing research, which is not commonly done, but I managed to convince people.
THACKRAY: When you look at American science, what would you like to change if you could? What upsets you? What do you think is out of place in some way, not working well?
CARRASCO: An obvious answer is the funding situation nowadays, which is worrisome. The situation is pretty tight at NIH and, understandably, everybody’s worried about it. That’s one thing. Another thing is that I have found that in this country people who are not doing science have sometimes strange perceptions of what science is, and I don’t think that’s very healthy altogether. Also I think that it is a pity that less people are going into science. They feel attracted by other fields where maybe the economic incentives are more apparent.
THACKRAY: What about competition? Does that trouble you in any way?
CARRASCO: Well, yes. After our paper was published, I started receiving telephone calls from several laboratories in the states and in Europe asking me whether I had the clone already or not because they were also trying. In many instances I was not aware of these other laboratories’ interest on this protein, because actually they’re not that interested in the protein but in the gene, and they want to study the regulation of the gene. To know that there are other groups which are bigger and more established doing it is worrisome. On the other hand, there’s not much I can do but try hard.
THACKRAY: As you try to harmonize your own career and pursue it, what were the key moments of decision for you, do you think?
CARRASCO: To decide to stay in science?
THACKRAY: I guess coming to the decision to come to the States was probably one of those, wasn’t it?
CARRASCO: Yes. I was aware that it would be very interesting to go to a very good laboratory abroad and be in a lab that was at the forefront of the particular field.
THACKRAY: Have you had grant applications that were turned down at all?
CARRASCO: No, not yet. I’ve only submitted one grant so far, this NIH grant.
THACKRAY: How do you think your life will be different ten years from now, not as regards the science you’re doing but how your time is spent?
CARRASCO: I’m finding that time tends to go faster and faster, maybe because I am busier and busier. But if everything goes well, it’s likely that I’ll have more people in the lab, and maybe I’ll be doing less laboratory work with my own hands. Not that I’m looking forward to that, but that’s a possibility. One has more people and other commitments. It is very possible that I would be teaching more. Right now I participate in some committees at Einstein - the admissions committee and MSTP [Medical Scientist Training Program] committee and recruitment - but with time it is also very possible that I’ll have to participate even more in those school activities.
THACKRAY: One last question. Are you keeping correspondence, notebooks, grant proposals, photographs of things?
CARRASCO: I have a few. Of course I have my grants and some important correspondence. I have pictures from meetings that I have attended.
THACKRAY: We’d like to just encourage you to hold onto some of those things.
[END OF AUDIO, FILE 1.2]
[END OF INTERVIEW]
INDEX
A
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 9, 10, 14
C
Carrasco, Marisa (sister), 1
Carrasco, Rossana (sister), 1
Carrasco, Salvador (brother), 1
cDNA, 12
coli, 7
competition, 13
E
Europe, 5, 13
F
Fogarty International Fellowship, 4
G
grants/funding, 2, 6, 10, 13, 14, 15
H
Hoffmann-La Roche AG, 6
I
iodide, 11, 12, 13
J
Journal of Biological Chemistry, 11
Juilliard School, 5, 8
K
Kaback, H. Ronald, 4, 5, 7
Kaminsky, Stephen M., 10
L
Levy, Orlie, 10
M
Mexico, 8
Mexico City, Mexico, 1, 2, 6
N
National Institutes of Health, 4, 5, 10, 13, 14
New York City, New York, 1, 5, 7, 8
New York University, 1
NIH. See National Institutes of Health
Nutley, New Jersey, 4, 6
P
Patel, Vihas, 10
Pew Scholars Program in the Biomedical Sciences, 10
Princeton University, 1
publish/publication, 7, 11, 13
R
religion, 2
Richards, Frederic M., 10
Roche Institute of Molecular Biology, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11
S
Switzerland, 5
T
transport, 4, 7, 9
U
United States of America, 6, 14
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, 3
W
Wesleyan University, 1
X
Xenopus, 11
Y
Yale University, 10
Z
Zyman, Samuel (husband), 5
1 Franck Vilijn and N. Carrasco. “Expression of the Thyroid Sodium/Iodide Symporter in Xenopus laevis Oocytes.” Journal of Biological Chemistry 264, no. 20 (1989): 11901-11903.
---------------
------------------------------------------------------------
---------------
------------------------------------------------------------
15
