[00:00:05]
SCHNEIDER:  Okay. So today is Monday, December 11, 2023. My name is Sarah Schneider and I am joined by David J. Caruso. We are conducting the first session of an oral history interview with Dr. André Isaacs online via Zoom. So Dr. Isaacs, thank you very much for joining us today. We’re looking forward to having this conversation. And to start off, I know you were born in Kingston, Jamaica, and I’m curious if you also grew up in Kingston, and what your experience was like as a child there. Maybe some early memories you have or some of your experience from those . . . your childhood growing up there.


[00:00:47]
ISAACS:  Sure. So yeah, I was born and raised in Kingston, Jamaica. I spent the first eighteen and a half years of my life there before I moved to the US. I went to a little, what we call in Jamaica, a basic school, which is preschool, the equivalent of preschool here in the US, in a pretty, pretty tough neighborhood with my grandmother and my mother and her siblings. And spent most of my childhood there until I got into a preparatory school after basic school, where I learned math and science and was, got pretty good at that material. And did fairly well in that school and then went on to high school, in Kingston, Jamaica as well, where I fell in love with the sciences, even deepened my interest in the sciences. And so I—all of that was in Kingston. It was all in Kingston, Jamaica, where I grew up, all those different times or parts of my educational background.

[00:02:07]
And some really fond memories, I would say, for me was in high school, I was a part of the choir. I was also a part of the student government, I guess, we called it the . . . back then it was the Student Council. Became the president of that, was a part of the choir, and the memories were just being with my friends. Some of the good memories I had were just being with my friends in a choir and the ways in which we were committed to our high school, to help clean up the school, the buildings, different rooms. We were, kind of, the model students. And so we were always on campus until 7:00, 8:00 p.m. at night. Just really making the environment one that was welcoming to not just us, but also to even the younger students. So just . . . really just hanging out with my friends a lot after high school—after classes are over.


[00:03:07]
SCHNEIDER:  And you mentioned the choir. What kinds of things would you sing or what was that experience like?
