              Harland G. Wood's oral history begins with a brief discussion of his role in the restructuring of Western Reserve University's medical curriculum. He then reflects on his childhood and education, and first interest in chemistry. He chronicles his career in chemistry and molecular biology from his college years through his extensive laboratory research at Iowa State College, where he first developed his concept of the fixation of carbon dioxide by bacteria. Throughout the interview, in addition to discussing research and the influence of various colleagues and associates, he often focuses on the numerous advancements that have occurred during his lifetime and their impacts (both positive and negative) on the way laboratory research is conducted. He concludes with his thoughts on the future of science, stressing the importance of continued enthusiasm and motivation in scientists of all ages.







INTERVIEWEE: Harland G. Wood
INTERVIEWER: James J. Bohning
LOCATION: Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio
DATE: 19 January 1990
WOOD: That was a pretty exciting time when we put the new medical curriculum through at Case Western Reserve University (then Western Reserve University). There was a lot of controversy that had to be argued out. I had a pretty big part. They had decided ahead of time that they were going to teach on an organ system basis. The first year was to be normal metabolism and cell biology. Then the second year would be pathological and its influence on metabolism and the organ system. They finally convinced me to be chairman of the Phase I Committee. Well, everybody that was on the Phase I Committee spent a lot of time getting the first year curriculum planned. It was sort of a political undertaking to try to figure out what people wanted and how we were going to get them to accept the plan.
     I realized, after a while, nobody was going to vote for this change unless they had a concrete example of what it was actually going to be like. There was a Professor [Carl J.] Wiggers here who was a very eminent professor of physiology and in his last years here. He, of course, didn't want to change, and I didn't blame him. Why should you change your teaching in the last year or so? So he was strongly against it, and probably for other reasons too, because there were other people who were against it as well. In fact, Carl Cori, during one of my visits to Washington University, really crawled down my throat. He said, "You're taking biochemistry right out of the biochemistry departments."
     We set up a committee called the Kidney Committee, representing that organ system. They planned all the lectures, all the labs, and how it was all going to be put together. I picked someone from Wiggers' department to chair the Kidney Committee. I figured I'd better get some support there if I could. His name was [Ewald E.] Selkurt, and he later became a chairman at Indiana. He did a good job.
     We got the plans well organized for the first year, but there were at least two or three heads that were not much in favor of a change. Wiggers was one, and there were a couple of others. So a committee was appointed to decide whether we should start or not. The doggone committee came back and said, "No, we have to wait a year." I was pretty disgusted. I certainly didn't want to spend another year running around trying to get everything lined up. [Thomas] Hale Ham was the chairman of the Committee on Education. He was formerly from Harvard, and a nice

guy. I went down to see him and said, "Doggone it all, there's no committee going to say that we can't start. There's going to be a meeting of the faculty, and the faculty is going to decide whether we start or not. I can tell you who's against it right now. There's about seven chairmen for it and a couple against it." And he said, "No, we can't do that." And I said, "Well, the heck we can't. I'm going to call a meeting myself if I have to!"
      So I went over and saw Dean [Joseph T.] Wearn, and the dean agreed that we should have a meeting. At the meeting Wiggers spoke against it, and some of the others and I spoke for it. The main thing they said was, "You can't start this until you know it's going to work." Well, it was called an experiment in medical education, and in experiments you don't know how things are going to work. You do an experiment and then you change it accordingly. That was my pitch. Of course, once it was started the second year had to be ready the following year. Alan Moritz, professor of pathology, was chairman of Phase II and he wasn't strong for a change. But he finally agreed that they would put the subjects in order on an organ system basis, but not necessarily correlate them. Well, that is the way we got started, and it was really a rat race because they had to build the labs for the correlated teaching in the basement of the medical school. The benches arrived the night before the classes were supposed to start. We had it fixed so that these benches were all on rollers and could be plugged in to electric outlets and next to the sinks. So Les [Lester 0.] Krampitz and I and others rolled them in and got the lab going.
Well, that's starting at the wrong end of my career.
BOHNING: That's all right. We can come back to that later.
WOOD: In your letter you asked about early grade and high school education and teachers.
